---
title: Building a Hybrid MRS for Spotify
---

## AC209A Data Science Final Project

Group 9. Chuqiao Yuan, Feiyu Chen, Queena Ziyi Zhou, Rong Liu

### Motivation and Overview

There are many leading music streaming services in the market, including Spotify, Pandora, and Apple Music. Thus, a robust Music Recommender System (MRS) is in high demand to improve user experience and increase user engagement. Many researchers have focused their work on traditional recommender systems, but MSR differs from these recommender systems because the duration of a song is short (3~5 minutes), the total number of existing songs is large (tens of millions), and songs are consumed in sessions, among which the same user’s taste may change.


In the early stage, we read a wide range of papers on recommendation systems, which introduce to us the popular approaches in this field, including Collaborative Filtering. More detail will be discussed in the later 'Literature Review' section. Moreover, our EDA results lead us to utilize playlist names, song emotions, and song genres in our model.

- **Goal**: ​Our goal is to build a robust MRS to recommend songs to the users given a set of songs the users have been listened to.
- **Approach**: W​e would like to hybridize two models: 1) Collaborative filtering, recommending songs based on similar users’ past preferences; 2) Content-based recommendation, using NLP techniques on song titles and lyrics to detect mood, and analyzing sound features to detect genre.

### Challenges and Solutions

#### 1. Data Size

MPD, MSD, and Lyrics Wiki all contain massive size of data. We want to use as much data as possible to produce better results, but fitting models on massize datasets will require excessive time and computer memory. 

We combine each set of playlists with the same title into a meta-playlist. Each meta-playlist contains all the songs from the sub-playlists, and keeps track of the number of times each song appears in all the sub-playlists. Moreover, we filter out songs that appear in fewer than five playlists to shrink our dataset without losing important information.

#### 2. Evaluation

At the end of our model training, we need to find a reasonable way to assess how robust our model is. In other words, we want to know if the recommended playlists generated by our model will be used by the actual users.

We generate a validation set of 5000 playlist, using the last 100 songs from each of the playlists as the ground truth output, and using the rest as the validation input. The validation set is carefully chosen so that the validation input length is about evenly distributed among zero to 150 songs. We use the two commonly used metrics for recommendation system: Precision and Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain. We also introduce number of clicks, a metric that Spotify uses.

#### 3. Cold Start

A general challenge in the recommender system is called Cold Start Problem. In our Spotify’s case, we need to decide how to recommend a full list of songs for those users who have listened to only a few songs or even no song at all.

We will recommend solely based on the collaborative filtering model, assigning equal weight to all the users in the model.


### Related Work
Here are some related works that guide us to design and implement our project. We would like to give special thanks to them. 


[1] Kim, Y.E., Schmidt, E.M., Migneco, R., Morton, B.G., Richardson, P., Scott, J., Speck, J.A. and Turnbull, D., 2010, August. Music emotion recognition: A state of the art review. In Proc. ISMIR (pp. 255-266).

"Recognizing musical mood remains a challenging problem primarily due to the inherent ambiguities of human emotions." In this paper, we learn that recognizing musical mood is a multiclass-multilabel classification or regression problem, where we try to annotate each music piece with a set of emotions. We can represent moods as multi-dimensional vector. In addition, we can directly use the existing music database, which has been manually annotated, to train our model.

[2] “Effection.” Effection, https://xindizhao19931.wixsite.com/spotify2. 

We want to associate song lyrics with musical mood and theme. Namely, we want to classify a song's mood based on its lyrics. This website teaches us to use both unsupervised method, Word2Vec, and supervised method, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), for language processing, sentiment analysis and predictive modeling. 

[3] Leskovec, J., Rajaraman, A. and Ullman, J.D., 2014. Mining of massive datasets. Cambridge university press.

In Chapter 9 Section 2, we learn to construct for each item a profile, which is a record or collection of records representing important characteristics of that item. Each profile can be viewed as a vector, whose entries are paired with a set of features. We also need to create vectors with the same components that describe the user’s preferences. Then we can just calculate the cosine distance between two sets to measure the similarity of two playlists.

[4] Logan, B., Kositsky, A. and Moreno, P., 2004, June. Semantic analysis of song lyrics. In Multimedia and Expo, 2004. ICME'04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on (Vol. 2, pp. 827-830). IEEE.

This paper shows us that we can use latent semantic analysis to compare the similarities among lyrics. However, as the paper points out, "similarity based on lyrics was found to be better than random but inferior to acoustic similarity, at least for the ground truth used." 

[5] Yang, H., Jeong, Y., Choi, M. and Lee, J., 2018, October. MMCF: Multimodal Collaborative Filtering for Automatic Playlist Continuation. In Proceedings of the ACM Recommender Systems Challenge 2018 (p. 11). ACM.

From this paper, we learn how to prepare our training dataset more appropriately. We would like to filter out songs that are not so popular, and therefore appear in only one or two playlists.


### References
- https://recsys-challenge.spotify.com/rules